# Tools Vulnerability Workshop - 2026 @ W&M 🎯

Welome! 🥳

This file describes the structure of this repository and provides some links that will help you to get started. The goal of this workshop is to help understand the following:

- How developers rely on static analysis tools for security,
- Finding issues/vulnerabilities using the tools,
- The security guarantees offered by these tools and
- How design/implementation issues/vulnerabilities can compromise those guarantees,

Additionally, we aim to make you familiar with the [Responsible Disclosure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Responsible_disclosure) approach.

In today's workshop, when you find a bug or vulnerability in an app or tool, report it to us by emailing Dr. Adwait Nadkarni and me only. You can discuss your findings with your team members only during this workshop.

Furthermore, you are required to provide additional details, such as

- What you found and where (be as precise as possible, e.g., line number, file name, method name, etc.),
- reason why you think it is a vulnerability and
- explain how the vulnerability can impact software or service.

## Package Description 🗂️

[In this package](https://github.com/LordAmit/mutation_workshop2026/blob/main/workshop_masc.zip), you will find logs from static analysis-based crypto API misuse detection tools, mutation logs, and source codes for applications we mutated. The organization is as follows:

```
|-- apps
|   |-- android
|   `-- java
|-- masc_logs
|   |-- android
|   `-- java
`-- tool_logs
    |-- cryptoguard
    |-- crysl
    `-- findsecbugs
```

### apps

`apps` folder contains the mutated codes of both Java and Android applications.

### MASC Logs
MASC stands for Mutation based Analysis of Static Crypto-misuse detectors (Not part of this workshop, but if you are interested, you can find out more here: https://amitsealami.com/MASC/ ). When given the source code of a base application in Java language format, the tool explores the code and mutates it according to pre-defined rules. The base applications can be either Android or Java applications. We have shared two types of mutation logs:

- Reachability, also known as exhaustive-scope mutation logs
- Selective, also known as similarity-scope mutation logs

#### Exhaustive/Reachability Logs

👉 Reachability mutation logs introduce mutations at every location possible to understand whether a particular tool can reach the mutations while analyzing.

The lines in the relevant log files start with the word `leak`.

An example of such a log file is [afh_download.log](https://github.com/LordAmit/mutation_workshop2026/blob/main/dir/masc_logs/android/afh_download.log), where the output looks like the following:

```
In file: ApplicationTest.java
Input operator: REACHABILITY
leak-0: ApplicationTest.ApplicationTest
In file: MD5.java
Input operator: REACHABILITY
leak-1: MD5.checkMD5
leak-2: MD5.checkMD5
leak-3: MD5.checkMD5
```

⭐️ **Tip**: Relevant log files will contain the keyword Reachability as the input operator.

#### Selective/Scope Logs

👉 Selective mutation logs introduce mutations "selectively" based on existing crypto API usage in the base app. Furthermore, they create separate code bases for each selected mutation case. That is, for reachability, only one mutated `code base` (alternatively, read `project directory`) contains all mutations. However, selective mutation will result in multiple code bases (again, `project directories`), each containing selective mutation cases.

In relevant logs, the lines start with `Mutant`. Selective mutation may introduce multiple misuse instances.

An example of a Selective mutation log is [carreport_mutants.log](https://github.com/LordAmit/mutation_workshop2026/blob/main/dir/masc_logs/android/carreport_mutants.log) file, which contains something like the following:

```
Mutant 1: carreport/util/webdav/CertificateHelper.java; TrustManagerInstace in line 94
Mutant 2: carreport/util/webdav/CertificateHelper.java; SSLContextInstance in line 93
Mutant 3: carreport/util/webdav/WebDavClient.java; HostnameVerifierInstance in line 69
```

⭐️ **Tip**: Relevant log files will contain the keyword _Mutant_.

Both types of log files contain sufficient details about the location of the mutation within the mutated application's source code.

### Tool Logs ⚙️

The tool logs (file name ends with .log) are arranged by the name of crypto-detectors.

The log files with a number as a suffix (such as `qpid-mutant1.log`) are from analysis logs of selectively mutated code bases.
`_original` indicates that the log is of an original, un-mutated base app. 
All other log files are generated by analyzing reachability type mutated apps.

📕  The analysis results do not include all the numbers from the mutation log. For example, we mutated the app `qpid` selectively more than 30 times. However, we only provide analysis results of 6 of them here to keep things simpler for this workshop. 😄

🔔 Please refer to the following when mapping mutation IDs to analysis reports for the **`qpid` app only**.

- Mutation ID 32 refers to analysis report 1
- Mutation ID 33 refers to analysis report 2
- Mutation ID 35 refers to analysis report 3
- Mutation ID 8 refers to analysis report 4
- Mutation ID 2 refers to analysis report 9
- Mutation ID 23 refers to analysis report 17

## Analyzing Tool Logs

Few outcomes are possible when we analyze mutated applications using a tool:

For mutant-based misuse, a tool can either (a) report it (true positive) or (b) not report it (false negative). 
Moreover, a tool can also report/not report misuses already existing in the code base, i.e., before we perform mutation.

- If a tool does not report a misuse, whether preexisting or introduced via mutation, it may or may not be a flaw of the tool!
- if you are wondering why, More about that in the following section!

📘 **Note about Tool Logs:** Tools produce reports in various formats. This is because tools are developed independently, and they came up with their own formats based on what worked best for themselves. 
Some tools offer reports in multiple formats, such as web pages and PDFs; others only provide text reports. We only share text-based reports here in this workshop for simplicity and faster searchability. 

## Tools 🧰

These tools are either from academia or industry and come with detailed documentation explaining what they aim to (and claim to) detect!

For ease of access, I have linked tools with their documentation here:

- CryptoGuard [paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1806.06881.pdf), [github](https://github.com/CryptoGuardOSS/cryptoguard)
- CrySL - [paper](https://bodden.de/pubs/ksa+18crysl.pdf), [github](https://github.com/CROSSINGTUD/CryptoAnalysis)
- FindBugs/SpotBugs with Find-Security-Bugs Extension - [SpotBugs](https://spotbugs.github.io/), [Find-Sec-Bugs](https://find-sec-bugs.github.io/)

Going through the documentation is important because if a tool claims that it only looks for misuse 'A', 'B,' and 'C' and you report a flaw related to misuse 'D' (that is, the tool not being able to detect 'D'), it is not a flaw.

## Reporting Issues 📜

Found a flaw in a tool? Great!

You must include the following in your report:

- Description of the Issue you found in the tool
- Locations related to the Issue, such as related logs, - location in source code, application name, mutant - number, etc.
- Reasoning about why you consider this an issue
- Impact in terms of compromising the security of an application

You will gain points based on the completeness of your report.
